[SPARK-44508][PYTHON][DOCS] Add user guide for Python user-defined table functions (#42272)
apache/spark: python/docs/source/user_guide/sql/python_udtf.rst

..  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

..  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

===========================================
Python User-defined Table Functions (UDTFs)
===========================================

> Spark 3.5 introduces a new type of user-defined fucntion: Python user-defined table functions (UDTFs),

Reviewer: typo: "fucntion" -> "function"

which take zero or more arguments and return a set of rows.

Implementing a Python UDTF
--------------------------

.. currentmodule:: pyspark.sql.functions

To implement a Python UDTF, you can implement this class:

.. code-block:: python

    class PythonUDTF:

        def __init__(self) -> None:
            """
            Initialize the user-defined table function (UDTF).

            This method is optional to implement and is called once when the UDTF is

>             instantiated. Use it to perform any initialization required for the UDTF.

Reviewer 2: Also should mention that it should be a default constructor which doesn’t accept any extra arguments?

            """
            ...

        def eval(self, *args: Any) -> Iterator[Any]:
            """"

>             Evaluate the function using the given input arguments.

Reviewer 3: Can we also describe the mapping between provided scalar argument(s) and the attributes of any provided relation argument with the ordering of these `*args` here? For example, we could mention that each provided scalar argument with index i in 0...N gets assigned to `*args` index i here, with the exception of at most one input relation argument at provided index j, and its attributes are injected one-by-one into the `*args` starting at index j?

Author: I am thinking about this too, but I found it difficult to explain in words. The interface is the same as scalar UDFs so I think Spark users should be able to figure it out. I can provide more examples.

Reviewer 3: 👍 more examples should be helpful. Maybe we could also add:

```
The arguments provided to the UDTF call map to the values in this *args list
in order. Each provided scalar expression maps to exactly one value in this
*args list. Each provided TABLE argument of N columns maps to exactly N
values in this *args list, in order of the columns as they appear in the
table.
```

            This method is required to implement.

>             Args:

Reviewer: I'm not pretty sure if we should follow [numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/en/latest/format.html#sections) style here since we're following them in overall PySpark code base. WDYT @HyukjinKwon ?

Reviewer 4: yeah should follow numpy doc style I think

                *args: Arbitrary positional arguments representing the input
                       to the UDTF.

            Yields:
                tuple: A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.

>                        Yield thisas many times as needed to produce multiple rows.

Reviewer: typo?: "thisas" -> "this as"

            Note:
                - The result must be a tuple.
                - UDTFs do not accept keyword arguments on the calling side.
                - Use "yield" to produce one row at a time for the UDTF result relation,

>                   or use "return" to produce multiple rows for the UDTF result relation at once.

Reviewer 2: We might want an example with `return`?

            Example:

>                 def eval(self, x: int, y: int):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                def eval(self, x: int, y: int) -> Iterator[Any]:
```

>                     yield x + y, x - y

Reviewer 3: can we also add an example with a combination of scalar constant arguments and a relation input argument, to show how the mapping  from provided SQL arguments to the python `*args` works? Could we include a SQL query and its results with each example as well?

Author: Sure! I will add a simple one here and a more complex one in the example section below.

            """
            ...

        def terminate(self) -> Iterator[Any]:
            """

>             Called when the UDTF has processed all rows in a partition.

Reviewer 3: We haven't really precisely defined what comprises a partition yet. Should we define it using the definitions from https://github.com/apache/spark/pull/42100 and https://github.com/apache/spark/pull/42174? Alternatively if these docs are targeting Spark 3.5 but those PRs are only going into `master`, we could simply define a partition here as either (1) just one `eval` call with the provided scalar argument(s), if any, or (2) several `eval` calls with an undefined subset of the rows from the input relation. Then we can expand it later.

            You can also yield additional rows if needed.

            Yields:
                tuple: A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.
                       Yield this if you want to return additional rows during termination.

            Example:
                def terminate(self):
                    yield "done", None
            """
            ...

The return type of the UDTF must be either a ``StructType`` or a DDL string, both of which 
define the schema of the UDTF output.

Here's a simple example of a UDTF implementation:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 39-53
    :dedent: 4

For more detailed usage, please see :func:`udtf`.

Registering and Using Python UDTFs in SQL
-----------------------------------------

Python UDTFs can also be registered and used in SQL queries.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 58-84
    :dedent: 4

Apache Arrow
------------
Apache Arrow is an in-memory columnar data format that is used in Spark to efficiently transfer

> data between JVM and Python processes. Apache Arrow is by default enabled for Python UDTFs.

Reviewer 2: It will be disabled by default in 3.5. #42329

Author: Yup I will update this doc

            
            The arguments provided to the UDTF call are mapped to the values in the
            `*args` list sequentially. Each provided scalar expression maps to exactly
            one value in this `*args` list. Each provided TABLE argument of N columns
            maps to exactly N values in this `*args` list, in the order of the columns
            as they appear in the table.

            This method is called on every input row, and can produce zero or more
            output rows. Each element in the tuple will correspond to one column
            specified in the return type of the UDTF.

            Parameters
            ----------
            *args : Any
                Arbitrary positional arguments representing the input to the UDTF.

            Yields
            ------
            tuple
                A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.
                Yield as many times as needed to produce multiple rows.

            Notes
            -----
            - The result of the function must be a tuple representing a single row
              in the UDTF result relation.

>             - UDTFs do not ccept keyword arguments during the function call.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
            - UDTFs do not accept keyword arguments during the function call.
```

            >>>     yield y + x, y - x
            """
            ...

        def terminate(self) -> Iterator[Any]:
            """
            Called when the UDTF has processed all input rows.

            This method is optional to implement and is useful for performing any
            cleanup or finalization operations after the UDTF has finished processing
            all rows. It can also be used to yield additional rows if needed.

            Yields
            ------
            tuple
                A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.
                Yield this if you want to return additional rows during termination.

            Examples
            --------
            >>> def terminate(self) -> Iterator[Any]:
            >>>     yield "done", None
            """
            ...

The return type of the UDTF defines the schema of the table it outputs. 
It must be either a ``StructType`` or a DDL string representing a struct type.

**Example UDTF Implementation:**

Here is a simple example of a UDTF implementation:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python

>     :lines: 38-42

Reviewer 2: We need to revisit the line numbers? I guess this is 36-40.
And ditto for the following examples.

..  Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

..    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

..  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

===========================================
Python User-defined Table Functions (UDTFs)
===========================================

Spark 3.5 introduces Python user-defined table functions (UDTFs), a new type of user-defined function. 

> Unlike scalar functions that return a single result value for every input, UDTFs is invoked in the ``FROM``

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unlike scalar functions that return a single result value from each call, each UDTF is invoked in the ``FROM``
```

clause of a query and returns an entire relation as output.
Each UDTF call can accept zero or more arguments.
These arguments can either be scalar expressions or table arguments that represent entire input relations.

Implementing a Python UDTF
--------------------------

.. currentmodule:: pyspark.sql.functions

> To implement a Python UDTF, you can define a class implementing the methods:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To implement a Python UDTF, you can define a class implementing the following methods:
```

.. code-block:: python

    class PythonUDTF:

        def __init__(self) -> None:
            """

>             Initialize the user-defined table function (UDTF).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            Initializes the user-defined table function (UDTF). This is optional.
```

            This method serves as the default constructor and is called once when the
            UDTF is instantiated on the executor side.
            
            Any class fields assigned in this method will be available for subsequent

>             calls to the `eval` and `terminate` methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            calls to the `eval` and `terminate` methods. This class instance
            will remain alive until all rows in the current partition have
            been consumed by the `eval` method.
```

            Notes
            -----

>             - This method does not accept any extra arguments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            - This method does not accept any extra arguments. Only the default
              constructor is supported.
```

            - You cannot create or reference the Spark session within the UDTF. Any
              attempt to do so will result in a serialization error.
            """
            ...

>         def eval(self, *args: Any) -> Iterator[Any]:

Reviewer 3: Should we document the polymorphic `analyze` method here as well?

            """

>             Evaluate the function using the given input arguments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            Evaluates the function using the given input arguments.
```

            This method is required and must be implemented.

            Argument Mapping:
            - Each provided scalar expression maps to exactly one value in the

>               `*args` list.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
              `*args` list. Or, if the `eval` method accepts `**kwargs`, these
              provide the corresponding argument names if the UDTF call passed
              SQL named arguments.
```

            - Each provided table argument maps to a pyspark.sql.Row object containing

>               the columns in the order they appear in the provided input relation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
              the columns in the order they appear in the provided input relation,
              and with the names computed by the query analyzer.
```

            This method is called on every input row, and can produce zero or more
            output rows. Each element in the output tuple corresponds to one column
            specified in the return type of the UDTF.

            Parameters
            ----------
            *args : Any
                Arbitrary positional arguments representing the input to the UDTF.

            Yields
            ------
            tuple
                A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.
                Yield as many times as needed to produce multiple rows.

            Notes
            -----
            - The result of the function must be a tuple representing a single row
              in the UDTF result relation.

>             - UDTFs currently do not accept keyword arguments during the function call.

Reviewer 3: this is now obsolete since @ueshin  implemented this functionality.

            Examples
            --------

>             >>> def eval(self, x: int, y: int) -> Iterator[Any]:

Reviewer 3: This example does not use `*args` but accepts the exact arguments as a list instead :) can we mention this is possible in the above description as well, and add an example with `*args*` and `**kwargs` as well, since all three ways are supported?

Author: I was thinking about this, but then I realized that using `*args` is not as readable as using variable names. It might not be something we should encourage users to use. For example:
```
def eval(self, *args):
    yield args[0], args[1]
```

            >>>     yield x + y, x - y
            >>>     yield y + x, y - x
            """
            ...

        def terminate(self) -> Iterator[Any]:
            """
            Called when the UDTF has processed all input rows.

            This method is optional to implement and is useful for performing any
            cleanup or finalization operations after the UDTF has finished processing

>             all rows. It can also be used to yield additional rows if needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            all rows. It can also be used to yield additional rows if needed.
            Table functions that consume all rows in the entire input partition
            and then compute and return the entire output table can do so from
            this method as well (please be mindful of memory usage when doing
            this).
```

            Yields
            ------
            tuple
                A tuple representing a single row in the UDTF result relation.

>                 Yield this if you want to return additional rows during termination.

Reviewer 3: should we mention here the tricky detail that you have to include a trailing comma when yielding a row of just one value (here and above in the `eval` description)?

Author: Yea let me add an example

            Examples
            --------
            >>> def terminate(self) -> Iterator[Any]:
            >>>     yield "done", None
            """
            ...

The return type of the UDTF defines the schema of the table it outputs. 

> It must be either a ``StructType`` or a DDL string representing a struct type.

Reviewer 3: should we put an example with this DDL string as well? It looks useful :)

Author: Will do. All the examples below are actually using DDL strings, but I couldn't find any documentation on this. cc @HyukjinKwon do you know if we have documentation on DDL strings of pyspark types?

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 82-116
    :dedent: 4

Arrow Optimization
------------------
Apache Arrow is an in-memory columnar data format used in Spark to efficiently transfer
data between JVM and Python processes. Apache Arrow is disabled by default for Python UDTFs.

To enable Arrow optimization, set ``spark.sql.execution.pythonUDTF.arrow.enabled`` to ``true``.
Alternatively, you can specify the ``useArrow`` parameter when declaring the UDTF:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 121-126
    :dedent: 4

For more details, please see `Apache Arrow in PySpark <../arrow_pandas.rst>`_.

More Examples
-------------

A Python UDTF that expands date ranges into individual dates:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 131-152
    :dedent: 4

A Python UDTF with ``__init__`` and ``terminate``:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 157-176
    :dedent: 4

Advanced Featuress
------------------

> TABLE input argument

Reviewer 3: I would recommend to propose this as the primary way of passing relation arguments, rather than in the "additional features" section, since this syntax conforms to the SQL standard.

One way is to just swap the LATERAL syntax to this "advanced features" section instead.

Author: Moved. But we might need to improve it in the future ([SPARK-44746](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SPARK-44746))

.. code-block:: python

    class PythonUDTF:

        def __init__(self) -> None:
            """
            Initialize the user-defined table function (UDTF).

            This method serves as the default constructor and is called once when the
            UDTF is instantiated on the executor side.
            
            Any class fields assigned in this method will be available for subsequent
            calls to the `eval` and `terminate` methods.

            Notes
            -----
            - This method does not accept any extra arguments.
            - You cannot create or reference the Spark session within the UDTF. Any
              attempt to do so will result in a serialization error.
            """
            ...

        def eval(self, *args: Any) -> Iterator[Any]:
            """
            Evaluate the function using the given input arguments.

            This method is required and must be implemented.
            
            The arguments provided to the UDTF call are mapped to the values in the
            `*args` list sequentially. Each provided scalar expression maps to exactly

>             one value in this `*args` list. Each provided TABLE argument of N columns

Reviewer 5: @dtenedor Here's the line

Reviewer 3: @allisonwang-db it turns out this part about `TABLE` arguments is wrong (I think I suggested it before, sorry). Instead of:

```
Each provided TABLE argument of N columns
maps to exactly N values in this `*args` list, in the order of the columns
as they appear in the table.
```

it should be something like

```
Each provided TABLE argument maps to a pyspark.sql.Row object containing
the columns in the order they appear in the provided input relation.
```

Author: Updated!

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 103-108
    :dedent: 4

For more details, please see `Apache Arrow in PySpark <../arrow_pandas.rst>`_.

More Examples
-------------

A Python UDTF with `__init__` and `terminate`:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 113-132
    :dedent: 4

A Python UDTF to generate a list of dates:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 137-173
    :dedent: 4

Advanced Features
-----------------

TABLE input argument
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Python UDTFs can also take a TABLE as input argument, and it can be used in conjunction 
with scalar input arguments.
By default, you are allowed to have only one TABLE argument as input, primarily for 
performance reasons. If you need to have more than one TABLE input argument, 
you can enable this by setting ``spark.sql.tvf.allowMultipleTableArguments.enabled`` to ``true``.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../examples/src/main/python/sql/udtf.py
    :language: python
    :lines: 178-197

>     :dedent: 4

Author: @ueshin @dtenedor I've added this TABLE argument support under the advanced feature section. We should add more examples here and in the udtf function docstring.

Author: Created [SPARK-44746](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/SPARK-44746)
